this is outside let there be neon
[Music]
what's up guys if you're new around here
my name is Sarah deechi I am in a neon
shop right now welcome to another
episode of that creative life for me
explore a creative topic or a person
today it's a neon shop and look at all
of it look what we have doing try to put
as many displays up some of these
people's pieces waiting to be picked up
you know when limited in space it's New
York City's it really it's 5050 it
really it's all over the map all over
the map it could be artwork it could be
restaurants visual displays private
gifts it could be special events film
and TV or everything pop-up shops
they're popping up it's amazing I first
opened up shop in 1972 and it has been
in this location since 84 I'm gonna
bring you along on a tour and also I
happen me on piece in the works for the
office my name is Sarah deechi runs with
peachy because my last name is very very
difficult to spell so the peach has kind
of been a part of my brand so I thought
what a perfect way to really brighten up
the office and make it epic it's maybe
neon peach that's how you do that
so right behind me ed is working on the
peach that neon peach that is going to
the cherry on top of my office some
something has been missing
I'm like so tell me a little bit about
the process that you have the big you
have the outline of what you're gonna do
and what is the first step you have this
how do you take a straight piece of
glass
well we get a pattern from the art
department they do the layout I bring it
over and they just fill me in little
information where the Transformers are
gonna go where they have to run the
wires then I mark out my electrodes then
I take a piece of hose here for
something like this it's pretty much all
curves and then I measure out a piece of
glass and that's how I figure out where
I'm gonna make my first batch
we use three types of fires over here we
have what they call the crossfire which
is for doing tight bends small bends
just heating a small area glass but a
project like this it's a lot of large
curves we have the ribbon burner over
here the ribbon burner it's an
adjustable plane so we can adjust it to
however much class I need to heat up for
my bed and the final fire we have is
with all the hands which we use for
splicing together our pieces of glass
and also for splicing on electronics
when I heat up the glass you can see
like this I would do in a crossfire
bends like this and when I go to make
the bend what happens is the wall
thickness starts to collapse so we have
to blow a little bit of air just to puff
it back out to maintain a wall thickness
and also maintain a nice even diameter
throughout the project and you just by
experience you know how much is the
block you start out sometimes you blow
too much you end up with a lot of
bubbles when you first learn to bend
it's 100 percent concentration you have
gravity working against you that's the
biggest thing that you come out of the
fire the glass once the slump so you
constantly have to turn turn turn you
get burned a lot you get cut a lot and
after a while you just just learn where
to grab the glasses
my name is Jeff Friedman
I'm the owner let there be neon let
there be neon was founded in 1972 by the
white artist Rudi Stern Rudi was also a
filmmaker kind of a guerrilla warfare
kind of of the streets filmmaker at that
time if you know about film work and
video work Rudi was using at that time
on the street the first portable video
equipment which was like two tons worth
of equipment he saw this need for neon
he loved neon and it was like a
forgotten craft at that point and so let
there be neon became the first ever
maybe still ever neon gallery or art
gallery dedicated to neon Rudi had this
brilliant idea very shortly thereafter
that he could offer something to the
average person that never been offered
before and that was for them the
opportunity to have something of their
own design or their name created in neon
I mean it was unheard of now it seems
like it's an obvious idea but at the
time is only really used for commercial
use and in bars and restaurants
[Music]
when I grew up in like the 70s and 80s
New York had more of a sleazy sleazebag
reputation the city was falling apart
there was no budget all this stuff the
four feet all over the subway trains etc
but neon was a real important part of
that and in a sleazy way had been in a
good way
so it was everywhere and it was in all
these storefronts and in bars and then
when let there be neon started in 72 you
began to see a creative possibility from
the young which would like to think that
we were somewhat responsible for as time
marched on into the cleaner 90s and
2000's up until today where there's a
huge amount of wealth that's come into
New York leaving or pushing the less
well-to-do people and creative artists
and writers etc etc fashion world out of
Manhattan more into the outer boroughs
most noticeably Brooklyn real estate
prices have become so expensive and it's
my belief that because of the high level
that real estate prices have reached
that that has really destroyed a lot of
the me on that old historical signs are
coming down because a new storefront or
a new national chain is moving in and
they're putting their plastic sign on it
or they're LED sign on it and it's just
uninteresting and very boring the more
exciting stuff is the artists that come
to us or even the regular storefront
people who say well okay my name is like
you know Joe's pizza but give me
something more than that
and that's how it happens this is where
people come and we try to offer as many
colors to people as possible
so confuse them as much as possible so
the colors are great because see I mean
neon is color right and you have like
these different hues and shades and
there's so many possibilities we could
put more than one color in one sign it
could splice it together as you saw in
the glass shop and I mean it's almost
endless yep yep so we got our little art
department where we kind of bridge
people's ideas with reality and make it
happen
yes Gary and Nick
[Music]
what's up Eric is a graphic designer
when I was in let there be neon you
message me I was like yo I worked with
him before yeah not only have I worked
with let there be neon but I actually
made a peach neon before like a small
tiny one for Atlanta project in Orange
Beach oh my gosh yeah I work with this
artist collective team within we work we
design the neon signs we paint the
murals by hand we design them too so
that's how I got started with working
with neon was through we work and
through lunch money basically we work
with interior designers they tell us
what the theme of the building is and
then we start to think about what kind
of art we want to put in it your work
loves doing neon signs so you know we
just started making them for pretty much
every single building it's probably my
favorite part of the job because you can
go from a tiny little sketch on paper
putting in the computer and then like a
couple months later it's shining and
everyone's taking pictures of it it's
like everyone's favorite thing in the
space so this is basically my digital
sketchbook I don't just do neons in here
to sprawl my projects it's really good
for murals because you can just take a
photo of the wall and start drawing
right on the wall versus drawing a
sketch standing it in yeah so here's one
of the neon projects that I did recently
for a project in Nashville and Nashville
is all about music so we came up with
some different phrases and we ended up
doing this one that just play it loud
and I started out with really simple
sketches this was one of probably about
30 different sketches over here on the
top and then I started refining it and
adding some more weight to it with neon
you know you only have this one line to
work with but you can also put it on top
of metal or plastic and make larger
letters so that's kind of what I was
thinking to do here and then the actual
photo of the finished beyond this is
like the file that we sent her with
every neon and we started with this
really explosive design but we ended up
moving more towards like a fat script to
make it feel really retro here I'm
actually designing the neon and mocking
it up on the wall so you can see how big
it's gonna be that's super important if
a neon is too small or too big it's
gonna look really awkward and here's how
it looks in there
so we use a mirrored plastic behind the
letters to make it really shine I went
through a lot of iterations we wanted to
do something that was like super 3d but
it end up coming at like twelve thousand
dollars so we got it down to like four
wanted it to be like 3d metal letters
but we ended up using this reflective
plastic that was still pretty cool so I
work in the basement here in fabrication
and that's where we make designs after
they're done being bent I work mainly in
painting of the signs what we do is as
you can see neon is all connected it's
just one piece of glass so what we have
to do is we can't block out P which
blocks the light from coming through
like the back of the letter so that when
it's lit it looks like individual
letters and not just like one big piece
this is a repair that I'm working on
today where they just put an extra piece
on that was broken so I'm going over
with the black block out paint and then
they want it white to match the white
wall so I just touch up all the white
pieces you can kind of see the
difference
between the black and the white so all
of this would just look like the front
of this and we put this like crazy tar
paint on it that blocks out any light
that comes through and then over the
black we put the white just so it looks
nice against the waiver okay so how did
you get into neon I grew up around it my
dad owns the business that's Jeff so
I've just like been here my entire life
and I've like always worked summers and
stuff and I went to school for art
studio art so this is what I studied is
actually making thing so it's nice that
I'm using it oh my gosh so you were the
cool little kid running around a neon
shop I've always been a fan of just you
know going out and seeing it and really
stoked to have a piece in my office it's
so excited about that but does it is it
like as cool to you as I was in the
beginning or is it kind of just like
your normal job no well growing up I
didn't really see it as anything
different but I always thought it was
cool but I never understood even what it
was it was just as a kid like oh my dad
works in art or these are just really
bright lights I think they're awesome
but getting older I'm learning what goes
into it which is great because it was
always just something that was there
to me but it's not like I'm demystify
from it I think it's an amazing way of
making art oh it's coming together
what is this over here what is this
table so so this is what we call our
aging table so after the tubes are
processed we basically check them and
test them to make sure that there are no
leaks the color is consistent that they
will pump and process properly they
don't have to stay here a long time
because neons really good like that it
either works it doesn't work so I mean
all of these tubes are good look how
close we are here so this is gonna go
above my computer's I think it's really
gonna be the final touch of my office
and we're getting close this is so is it
rewarding to when people come in and
they see the neon sign for the first
time it's great how do you feel because
you just had an idea
right and this happens all the time you
had this like this peach yeah and and
now you're actually seeing it exactly
it's so cool because you know when you
do video work you have an idea of you go
shoo and film it you're very much so a
part of the process so it's cool when
you have an idea and you're basically
like you hand it off to someone you
trust them and in this case I get to see
you behind the scenes but I can only
imagine how people feel when they come
in and see their neon sign for the first
time
[Music]
okay where Joseph is doing is he's
looking to unit up to the we call a
tower pumping system and he's gonna open
up the stopcock and put it under a
partial vacuum and once it's under
partial vacuum he'll start our bombarda
which is a very large transformer at
that point he'll be lighting up whatever
remaining air is in the tube then the
tube he heats it up to about 130 degrees
Fahrenheit burns off any impurities and
he's going to open the stopcock again
and pull it down to ultra-high vacuum
and after it cools he can backfill over
the yard
[Music]
even if you don't know the specifics of
what you love or want to do or where you
see yourself in the future which i think
is a ridiculous thing to aspire to like
where do I see myself in the future who
cares
where do you see yourself right now be
happy I mean you could take breaks do
other things and try other things always
keep it new will always keep it fresh
and creative and absolutely don't give a
hoot about what other person's opinions
might be the roads will lead you where
they lead you all I can say is this try
to be as focused as you can try to do
what you're really enjoy doing and don't
stop let there be neon and everyone who
was involved with this process it was so
cool to document it and share that with
you guys follow them on Instagram their
Instagram is linked in the description
below
wow-wow-wow can't wipe a smile off my
face let me know if you like this video
hit that subscribe button down below for
new videos every single week I hope you
guys enjoyed this episode of that
creative life go out there and crush it
live your best creative life because
yeah that's all you can do stay Peachy
stay baby she okay bye
[Music]